---
layout: post
title: bam.iobio 2.0
image: /public/images/blog/bam_2.0/banner.png
subtitle: Greatly improved coverage chart and local CRAM support
tags:
  - Anders Pitman
  - bam.iobio
---

# Announcing bam.iobio 2.0!

We're exciting to announce the launch of bam.iobio 2.0. This update represents
a major rework of the underlying code of the app, which is now using the Vue.js
framework. This new framework gives us much more leverage and flexibility when
adding features and fixing bugs.

As part of the update, we've also added several new features.

The most important ones are:
* Added a Get Help page
* Local CRAM support
* Overhauled read coverage chart

I'll highlight each of these below.


## Get Help page

First of all, you'll notice a "Get Help" button in the top right of the
app, on the navigation bar.

# TODO get help button image here


This button takes you to the brand new help
page.

# TODO get help page image here

The purpose of this page is to provide a way for users to report issues
without requiring any sort of account registration. Only an email address
is necessary. We hope that having a quick and direct line to the developers
will help our users resolve issues and make the experience better overall.


## Local CRAM Support
bam.iobio has supported loading CRAMs via url for a while now. However, when
loading files from your local hard drive, only BAM was supported. We
architected a new system that not only simplifies the way we load BAMs, but
also adds CRAMs as well.

# TODO load local bam/cram image here


## Improved Read Coverage Chart

Last but not least. Although the read coverage chart has always been
front-and-center in bam.iobio, it was somewhat barebones. That's no longer the
case. Here's the old version:

# TODO old bam coverage chart image

And here's what what the same data looks like in the new version:

# TODO new bam coverage chart image

First, we added few nice visual cues for various situations. Chromosomes which
are in the header but don't have any reads are now grayed out, instead of just
missing from the chart.  The chromosomes also render as the data streams in, so
you don't have to wait for everything to download before seeing some of the
results. We also added a horizontal line indicating the average coverage, as
well as y-axis labels showing approximate coverage values.

Importantly, we also fundamentally changed the way the chart is drawn. It used
to be a simple line chart, which sometimes made it difficult to understand,
depending on the data. It's now essentially a bar chart with many little bars
next to each other. This makes it much easier to spot regions with 0 coverage,
which show up naturally as vertical gaps. It also makes it simple to see
things like copy number variations (CNVs), as can be seen below:

# TODO bam coverage CNV image

The new bam.iobio has already started rolling out. The process should complete
over the next few days. If you use bam and haven't been switched over yet, you
will be soon. We hope you like the new features. If you run into any problems,
please use the help page to get in touch with us!


# Post TODO
* Add link to vuejs
* don't have any [reads|alignments|?]?
